Sending patches:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Note: We know our rules place a burden on you, but rest assured that
maintaining a big and complex software project is even harder, so please
accept our rules. We cannot afford to spend our time fixing buggy, broken or
outdated patches. The closer you follow our rules the higher is the probability
that your patch will be included.

 0. Do not send complete files. These need to be diffed by hand to see the
    changes, which makes reviews harder and less likely to occur. Besides as
    soon as one of the files changes, your version becomes harder to apply,
    thus reducing its chances of being accepted.

 1. Always make patches for Subversion HEAD. The README describes how to check
    out Subversion and daily snapshots are available from our download page.
    We do not accept patches for releases or outdated Subversion revisions.

 2. Make unified diffs ('svn diff' or 'diff -Naur'). Unified diffs can be
    applied easily with 'patch'. This is much harder with other diff types.
    Besides, unified diffs are more readable and thus easier to review.

 3. Create the diff from the root of the MPlayer source tree, this makes the
    diff easier to apply as it saves the step of searching for and changing
    to the correct directory.

 4. Test the functionality of your patch. We'll *refuse* it if it breaks
    something, even if it extends other features!

 5. Read your patch. We'll *refuse* it if it changes indentation of the
    code or if it does tab/space conversion or other cosmetic changes!

    NOTE: If you already wrote some code and did cosmetic changes, you can
    use 'diff -uwbBE' to help you remove them. Don't forget to check the
    patch to make sure diff didn't ignore some important change and remove
    any remaining cosmetics!
    To use these options directly with svn, use this command:
    svn diff --diff-cmd diff -x -uwbBE

 6. Comment parts that really need it (tricky side-effects etc).
    Always document string operations! Comment on what you are doing
    and why it is safe. This makes it easy to review and change your
    code if needed. Commenting trivial code not required.
    Comments must be English!

 7. If you implement new features, add or change command line switches or
    modify the behavior of existing features, please do not forget to also
    update the documentation. The documentation maintainers will assist you
    in doing this. Updating the English documentation is enough. If you
    speak several languages you are of course welcome to update some of the
    translations as well.

 8. If you make independent changes, try to send them as separate patches
    in separate mails. Likewise, if your patch is very big, try splitting
    it into several self-contained pieces. Each part can then be reviewed
    and committed separately. Logical units should stay together, though,
    i.e. do not send a patch for every file or directory you change.

 9. Send your patch to the mplayer-dev-eng mailing list as attachment with
    the subject line:
    '[PATCH] very short description of the patch'.
    In the mail, describe in a few sentences what you change and why.
    The subject line is very important if you do not want your patch to get
    lost in the noise. We need the uppercase [PATCH] to be able to search
    for unapplied patches, so please use it.
    Do not send your patch as a reply to some other unrelated mail, compose
    a new message, otherwise it will probably get overlooked.
    Do not compress your patch unless it is larger than 80k or if you know
    that your mailer messes up (reformats) text attachments. It only makes
    handling the patch more difficult. If you have to compress your patch,
    use either bzip2, gzip or zip to compress it, not a different format.
    You have to subscribe to mplayer-dev-eng since we blocked postings from
    non-subscribers after spam problems and because patches get reviewed by
    the developers on the list. We want you to be available for discussing
    your code, you might be asked to make modifications before we accept it.
    Don't worry, mplayer-dev-eng is not high traffic and you can subscribe
    but unset the "Mail delivery" option so that you can post without getting
    any mails.
    Do not upload the patch to a web or FTP site, send it directly to the
    mailing list. The fewer steps it takes us to get at the patch the higher
    the likelihood for it to get reviewed and applied. If your patch is so
    big you cannot send it by mail, try splitting it into smaller pieces.

10. Give us a few days to react. We try to review patches as fast as possible,
    but unfortunately we are constantly overloaded with work, be it MPlayer-
    related or from our day to day lives. If your patch seems to be ignored,
    send a reminder asking for opinions as a reply to the original patch and
    mention that you got ignored. We are interested in your work and will
    eventually either accept it or reject it with an explanation of what we
    disliked about your patch. We will often ask you to make changes to your
    patch to make it acceptable. Implement them if you want to see your patch
    applied and send the update to the mailing list. Remember that updates and
    reminders must be sent as replies to the original patch to preserve proper
    mail threading.

11. Do not immediately ask for Subversion write access. If you have contributed
    one or more nice, acceptable patches and they need maintaining or you want
    to be an MPlayer developer, you'll get Subversion write access.

12. For consistency reasons, all option names must use '-' instead of '_'.

13. If you make a nontrivial contribution and wish to be mentioned in the
    AUTHORS file, include that in your patch.

14. Do not use printf for console output, use our own mp_msg functions instead.
    For the output to be translated (which includes all messages of level
    MSGL_HINT and below), put the strings in help/help_mp-en.h. If you change
    strings, remove the occurrences of these strings from the translations.
    There may be (compilation) trouble if outdated translations remain in place
    and translators will pick up changes more easily if they see a new message
    that has to be translated.

15. If you send a modified or updated version of your patch, resend the
    complete patch. It is very time-consuming and error-prone to piece
    together patches that are distributed over several mails.
    Please always resend patches as replies to the original mail to keep
    the thread with the discussion together.

Thank you!
